.\" This file is part of GNU Dico                                -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright (C) 2014-2019 Sergey Poznyakoff                     
.\"                                                                      
.\" GNU Dico is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify     
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by 
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 3, or (at your option)  
.\" any later version.                                                   
.\"                                                                      
.\" GNU Dico is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,          
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of       
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the        
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.                         
.\"                                                                      
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License    
.\" along with GNU Dico.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.    
.so config.man
.TH DICOD 8 "September 25, 2018" "GNU DICO" "GNU Dico Reference"
.SH NAME
dicod \- GNU dictionary server
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nh
.na
\fBdicod\fR\
 [\fB\-ETVfist\fR]\
 [\fB\-D\fR \fISYMBOL\fR[\fB=\fIVALUE\fR]]\
 [\fB\-I\fR \fIDIR\fR]\
 [\fB\-L\fR \fIDIR\fR]\
 [\fB\-x\fR \fILEVEL\-SPEC\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-config=\fIFILE\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-config\-help\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-debug=\fILEVEL\-SPEC\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-define=\fISYMBOL\fR[\fB=\fIVALUE\fR]]\
 [\fB\-\-foreground\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-include\-dir=\fIDIR\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-inetd\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-lib-dir=\fIDIR\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-lint\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-no\-preprocessor\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-no\-transcript\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-preprocessor=\fIPROG\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-single\-process\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-source\-info\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-stderr\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-syslog\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-trace\-grammar\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-trace\-lex\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-transcript\fR]
.PP
\fBdicod\
 [\fIOPTIONS\fR]\
 \fB-r\fR|\fB\-\-runtest\
 \fIMODULE\fR\
 [\fIARG\fR...]\
 [\fB\-\-\fR \fIARG\fR...]
.PP
.B dicod \-h
.PP
.B dicod \-\-help
.PP
.B dicod \-\-usage
.PP
.B dicod \-\-version
.ad
.hy
.SH NOTE
This manpage is a short description of GNU \fBdicod\fR.  For a detailed
discussion, including examples and usage recommendations, refer to the
\fBGNU Dico Manual\fR available in texinfo format.  If the \fBinfo\fR
reader and \fBGNU Dico\fR documentation are properly installed on your
system, the command
.PP
.RS +4
.B info dico
.RE
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual.
.PP
You can also view the manual using the info mode in
.BR emacs (1),
or find it in various formats online at
.PP
.RS +4
.B http://www.gnu.org.ua/software/dico/manual
.RE
.PP
If any discrepancies occur between this manpage and the
\fBGNU Dico Manual\fR, the later shall be considered the authoritative
source.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Dicod
is a dictionary server daemon.  It implements the
.B DICT
protocol defined in
.BR "RFC 2229" .
.PP
.B Dicod
is a part of
.BR "GNU Dico",
a package that provides, apart from the server itself, a set of
loadable modules and a command line client program
.BR dico (1).
.PP
Upon startup, the server reads its configuration file
.BR \*(ET/dicod.conf ,
loads and initializes the dictionary modules defined there and starts
serving requests.
.PP
When started in
.I daemon mode
(which is the default),
.B dicod
listens for incoming connections on sockets requested in its
configuration.  When an incoming connection arrives, the server
spawns a copy of itself dedicated for serving that particular
connection.  Unless configured otherwise, in this mode \fBdicod\fR
detaches itself from the controlling terminal and operates in
background.
.PP
In
.B inetd mode
the server listens on
.B DICT
requests on its standard input stream and sends replies to its
standard output stream.  As the name indicates, this mode is
intended for use with
.BR inetd (8)
or a similar daemon.
.PP
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Program Mode
.TP
.B \-E
Preprocess configuration file and exit.  See the section
\fBPREPROCESSOR\fR below.
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-inetd
Run in \fIinetd mode\fR.
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-lint
Check configuration file syntax and exit.
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-runtest
Run unit tests for module.  The arguments that follow this option
are collected into two arrays: arguments up to the \fB\-\-\fR marker
(or end of line, if it is not present) form the vector that is passed
to the module's \fBdico_run_test\fR function.  If the \fB\-\-\fR
marker is present, arguments that follow it are collected into a
separate argument vector starting from slot 1, its 0th element is set
to point to the module name and the resulting vector is passed to the
\fBdico_init\fR function of the module. 

When running unit tests, configuration file is ignored.  The diagnostic
messages are printed to the standard error output.
.SS Modifiers
.TP
.BI \-\-config= FILE
Read configuration from \fIFILE\fR, instead of
.BR \*(ET/dicod.conf .
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-foreground
Operate in foreground.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-single\-process
In \fIdaemon mode\fR, process connections in the main process, without
starting subprocesses for each connection.  This means that the daemon
is able to serve only one client at a time.  This option is intended
for debugging purposes only.  Never use it in production environment.
.TP
.B \-\-stderr
Output diagnostic to stderr.  Useful only together with
.BR \-\-foreground .
.TP
.B \-\-syslog
After successful startup, output any diagnostic to syslog.  This is
the default.
.SS Debugging
.TP
.BR \-T ", " \-\-transcript
Enable session transcripts.  This instructs \fBdicod\fR to log all
commands it receives and all responses it sends during the session.
Transcript is logged via the default logging channel.  If syslog
is enabled, the \fBdebug\fR priority is used.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-transcript
Disable session transcript.
.TP
.B \-\-source\-info
Include source line information in the debugging output.
.TP
.B \-\-trace\-grammar
Trace configuration file parser.
.TP
.B \-\-trace\-lex
Trace configuration file lexer.
.TP
\fB\-x\fR, \fB\-\-debug=\fINUMBER\fR
Set debug verbosity level.  The argument is an integer
ranging from \fB0\fR (no debugging, default) to \fB100\fR
(maximum debugging information).
.SS Preprocessor Control
.TP
\fB\-D\fR, \fB\-\-define=\fISYMBOL\fR[\fB=\fIVALUE\fR]
Define preprocessor symbol \fISYMBOL\fR.  Optional \fIVALUE\fR supplies
the new symbol value.  This option is passed to the preprocessor verbatim.
.TP
\fB\-I\fR, \fB\-\-include\-dir=\fIDIR\fR
Add the directory \fIDIR\fR to the list of directories to be searched for
preprocessor include files.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-preprocessor
Do not use external preprocessor.
.TP
.BI \-\-preprocessor= PROG
Use \fIPROG\fR as a preprocessor for configuration file.
.SS Additional information options
.TP
.B \-\-config\-help
Show a summary of configuration file syntax and available statements.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print program version.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print a short summary of command line options.
.TP
.B \-\-usage
Display a short usage message.
.SH PREPROCESSOR
Prior to parsing, \fBdicod\fR configuration file is preprocessed using
.BR m4 (1).
It is invoked with `-s' flag, instructing it
to include line synchronization information in its output.  This
information is then used by the parser to display meaningful
diagnostic. 
.PP
The include path is set initially to the following two directories:
.PP
.B \*(VI
.br
.B \*(DI
.PP
It can be further modified using the
\fB\-I\fR (\fB\-\-include\-directory\fR) command line option.
.PP
If the file
.B pp\-setup
is found in the include path, it is sourced before the configuration
file.  This can be used to provide macros and constants for the
configuration.
.PP
The default
.B pp\-setup
file changes the quote characters to
.BR [ " and " ] ,
and renames all
.B m4
built-in macros so they start with the prefix
.BR m4_ .
The latterr has the effect similar to that of
.B GNU m4 \-\-prefix\-builtin
option, but has an advantage that it works with other
.B m4
implementations as well.
.PP
Additional definitions can also be provided from the command line
using the \fB\-D\fR (\fB\-\-define\fR) option.
.PP
To view preprocessed configuration, use the \fB\-E\fR option.  It
prints the preprocessed text on the standard output.
.PP
To disable preprocessing, use the \fB\-\-no\-preprocessor\fR option.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR dicod.conf (5),
.BR dico (1),
.BR "RFC 2229" .
.PP
Complete \fBGNU Dico\fR manual: run
.B info dico
or use
.BR emacs (1)
info mode to read it.
.PP
Online copies of \fBGNU Dico\fR documentation in various formats can be
found at:
.PP
.in +4
.B http://www.gnu.org.ua/software/dico/manual
.SH AUTHORS
Sergey Poznyakoff
.SH "BUG REPORTS"
Report bugs to <bug\-dico@gnu.org.ua>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2008-2018 Sergey Poznyakoff
.br
.na
License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>
.br
.ad
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.\" Local variables:
.\" eval: (add-hook 'write-file-hooks 'time-stamp)
.\" time-stamp-start: ".TH [A-Z_][A-Z0-9_.\\-]* [0-9] \""
.\" time-stamp-format: "%:B %:d, %:y"
.\" time-stamp-end: "\""
.\" time-stamp-line-limit: 20
.\" end:

